# Web Interface Usage Guide

The Harvester web interface is very simple:

## Main Section (default)
The main "default" page contains three sections:
  1. A simple form to allow you to initiate harvests.
  2. A list of "recent" harvests, their exit status and a link to view the log file.
  3. A section indicating the "fragment loader" status: (active/inactive), #of fragments in the queue etc.
This last section also shows recent activity from the fragment loader log file.

## The "data" Url
The web interface also contains a script to allow you to inspect data in the harvester's internal caches.
To use this, you have to manually enter a url of the form:

      %VIVO_URL%/harvesterControl/data?item=xxxxxxxxx

Here the *?item=xxxxxxxxx* section is where you specify the data you want to look at, you can specify to look at a particular Elements item, for example:

   * ?item=user10
   * ?item=publication245676
   * ?item=grant2893
   * ?item=activity4353
   * ?item=teaching-activity234
   * *etc*

***Note:** You have to use the internal Elements ID of the item (i.e. you cannot use proprietary-ids, usernames,etc). If you are dealing with a user in Vivo - you can usually work out their Elements ID by looking at the raw RDF from their Vivo profile and looking at their "authorships".*

Additionally you can use these three special options:
  * ?item=additions
  * ?item=subtractions
  * ?item=group-membership

The first two simply return the additions and subtractions documents generated by the harvester at the end of the last harvest, i.e. The output of the "diff" operations between the set of triples the harvester would like to be in Vivo now and the equivalent results from the last harvest (aka the change-sets).
The latter is simply the harvester's cache of data about user group membership in Elements.

**NOTE: YOU WILL ONLY EVERY GET A MAXIMUM OF 5000 LINES RETURNED FROM ANY GIVEN FILE, THIS IS TO ENSURE REASONABLE PERFORMANCE.**

 ## Select All
 One feature worth knowing is that generally, when viewing a file in the web interface (e.g a log file or a file in the internal cache via the data url) you can hit "Ctrl a" to select the data of the file without selecting any other elements of the web interface. From here you can simply copy and paste to a text editor of your choice.

***Note:** If the file is truncated for any reason, you will only get the text that is displayed in the web interface, not the full file.*
